1 
 
 
2 
 
From teaching children to engaging families:   
Lessons from Pratham’s experiences during the pandemic    
January 2022 
 
Compared to other countries, India has had one of the longest duration school closures during the 
pandemic. In some states, schools have remained shut for a period of almost two years. The entire 
education sector had to scramble to design strategies for staying connected to children. Looking 
back at our own education efforts in Pratham during this time, it seems clear that our focus moved 
from “teaching” children to “reaching” families so that they in turn could engage with their children 
on learning activities. Although developed directly in response to pandemic induced school closures, 
the lessons learned from these efforts is influencing our operating strategies even as we head 
towards non-pandemic times.1  
 
With the sudden imposition of lockdown in March 2020, like many others, we had to transition 
abruptly and without preparation from face-to-face daily interactions with children to connecting 
from a distance. Initially, we focused on reaching families and trying to engage children rather than 
on learning.  Families were facing many kinds of difficulties – economic disruptions, uncertainties 
over livelihoods and fear about getting sick.  We felt that it was important to engage children and 
provide them with fun activities that took their mind off problems around them. The message 
campaign in the initial months was called “Karona Thodi Masti Thodi Padhai”.2  In focusing on 
engagement, we learned a lot about how to facilitate and sustain continued participation of not only 
children but also parents and family members. We began to understand how motivation can be kept 
high despite challenges.  We saw how important it was to constantly adjust, adapt and improve 
content and keep working on how to improve delivery and feedback.     
 
For much of the period - April 2020 to July 2021, we sent messages for children to  families in 
approximately 11,000 rural and urban communities where there had been a direct Pratham connect 
in pre-COVID times. On average, about 300,000 messages went out every day. At the peak of the 
“reach out” and “staying in touch” campaigns the daily numbers were close to 475,000.  
 
Learnings from the pandemic period can be put into three broad buckets:  
(a) Using remote means to stay in touch with children and their families   
(b) Designing useful content for the family as well as the child  
(c) Leveraging social structures to engage families and through them their children     
 
 
A. Using remote means to stay in touch with children and their families  
 
Engaging communities and networks to find children: Constantly expanding and updating lists of 
active phone numbers was central to maximizing the reach of our programs: Prior to the pandemic, 
especially where we were meeting children daily in communities and schools, there was no need for 
phone numbers. When the pandemic suddenly hit and lockdown was imposed, we hardly had 
anyone’s numbers. However, a fast, determined and systematic push to “reach out” brought in 
many phone numbers quickly into our network. Each Pratham person called anyone they could, in 
the communities in which they had been working. School teachers, local elected officials, anganwadi 
 
1 This note focusses on processes and strategies that were used by Pratham to remain connected to children 
during this long period of school closure. At the end of the note, there is a section on data that links possible 
impact of these efforts on children’s learning.  
 
2 “Karona Thodi Masti Thodi Padhai” literally meant “let’s do some fun and some study”. The word “karona” in 
several Indian languages means “to do”. It is also used as a play on the word “corona”.  
3 
 
workers – all were useful in this reaching-out process. In the early days of the lockdown, the effort 
was structured in the following way: contact at least one person in each community (family member 
or youth) and through them reach out to at least one person in each hamlet in the village. And using 
the same principle of cascading, maximize the reach in every hamlet.  In the education programs, 
Pratham’s internal tracking system shows that there were 56,800 active numbers on April 12, 2021; 
this figure increased to 207,400 by June 12, 2021 and kept growing as days went on.3  Having a list of 
active phone numbers (and information about the type of phone) of children’s families and keeping 
this list updated is a key learning that has to be part of the preparedness for future disruptions. The 
broad numbers (10,000 + communities and a steady figure of 300,000 phone numbers) suggest that 
at least 25-30 families were directly reached in each community. However, it was also often the case 
that messages got forwarded from receivers to more people within the same communities and to 
friends and families.4  
 
Narrowing the unit of operation: Prior to the pandemic, the usual unit of operation for Pratham’s 
education programs was the local government primary school and the village in which the school 
was situated (and the equivalent in urban areas). However, as the lockdown proceeded, for reaching 
out, tracking and other activities, the sub-village unit – usually the hamlet was the most useful. Even 
as schools are re-opening, the hamlet wise tracking of re-enrollment and attendance is proving to be 
very useful for targeted attention. The mohalla or hamlet is likely to remain the basic unit of 
planning and operation for Pratham’s field programs in the future.5  
 
Maximizing reach required knowing what kinds of phones families had : Early in the pandemic, it 
became clear that smartphones were available only in some families. The incidence of  the families 
who had access to smartphones ranged from 30% to 60+% depending on the location and the type 
of family. However close to 90% had access to some kind of phone (either a basic phone or a smart 
phone). 6  Together the aggregate data and the anecdotal ground level experiences indicated that 
we needed to connect also to basic phones. Over time, about 40-45% of all Pratham messages were 
SMS messages and the rest were WhatsApp. Depending on the social structures into which 
messages were being sent, combinations of messaging (SMS and WhatsApp) were also sent. For 
example, in 2021, there was large-scale formation of “mother’s groups” by neighbourhood 
(hamlet/mohalla). Mothers of young children (usually in pre-school or Grade 1 and 2) in the same 
neighbourhood came together to share experiences and activities.  Individual mothers got SMS 
messages on a daily basis but once a week the mothers’ group leader (often referred to as 
SmartMata) would receive digital content for group activities. With a large section of the population 
not being able to access smartphones, it is critical that both SMS and WhatsApp options are used 
equally; delivery and content needs to be continually adapted to these conditions.  
 
Tracking access and usage patterns : In the first few weeks of lockdown, where literally all family 
members were at home, children’s access to the available smartphones was high. However, as 
lockdown restrictions loosened up, adults in the family began to go out for work, we noticed 
declines and delays in children’s responses to messages. Further, as the economic disruptions 
continued, some households had difficulty in buying internet time. Changing external conditions 
influence access; how and when children get to use the phone for educational purposes can vary on 
these conditions – access is dynamic and constantly changing. Therefore, regular tracking of access 
and analysis of usage patterns is essential if remote learning mechanisms are to be used for a long 
period of time.  
 
3 See Pratham Pandemic Report 1 (MME 2020-2021)  
4 We know that a significant amount of “forwarding” happened. However accurately estimating the extent of 
such activity has been hard to do.  
5 See slide no. 6 in Pratham Pandemic Report 1  
6 Pratham Pandemic Report 1   
4 
 
 
Having a smartphone at home does not necessarily mean that children have access: Time and 
again, children and teachers have complained that just because there is smartphone in the 
household does not automatically ensure that children have access to it. Usually the smartphone 
belongs to an adult (parent or other family member) who is at work all day. When s/he returns 
home at night, it is often not possible to use the phone at that time to access learning 
opportunities.7 In fact, ASER 2021 data shows that on average 30+% of children in households with 
smartphones do not have access to the digital device and that access varies considerably by age and 
grade.8 The key lesson is that simply having a smartphone in household does not guarantee ongoing 
and continuous access. Any distance education program should not only use figures of smartphone 
penetration but also build in information about usage patterns in order to effectively plan online 
lessons or any other form of remote education.   
 
B. Designing useful content for use by the family as well as the child 
 
Before COVID, in most of Pratham’s education programs, instruction was largely carried out in a 
class-room or group setting, where an instructor/teacher did actual activities with children. The 
direct and daily connect between the “teacher” and the “learner” shaped how activities were 
organized. The “delivery” of teaching-learning was direct; oral instructions and interactions, physical 
materials, whether print or actual objects, were used. As part of Pratham’s instructional practice, 
children did large group activity, small group practice and then individual work as well. Other than 
cost constraints, there were no limitations on what kinds of materials or activities were to be utilized 
and feedback and response to activities and materials was instantly available.  
 
The sudden arrival of the pandemic fundamentally changed the very basis on which instruction was 
organized. “Delivery” depended on device availability and accessibility and only digital content could 
be sent. Two interconnected elements had to be considered: 
 
(a) Delivery depended on the mechanism by which activities or tasks could be sent. While 
WhatApp messages could have videos, audio or text files, SMS was limited to 160 characters. 
It was a challenge to see how to maximize what a 160 character limit could unleash. 9 
 
(b) Digital content in the form of engagement activities arrived in the family via a device 
belonging to someone in the family. The receiver then had to take the activity to the child. In 
many cases, the child could not as yet read so a family member had to explain and 
demonstrate what had to be done with specific activities. This implied that content that was 
being sent needed to be adapted for use in the family.  
 
A few illustrations will help to make these points clearer.  
 
Using creativity to customize content to meet the requirement of the platform used:  
Videos can help to demonstrate activities. For example, to encourage counting, short clips were 
made of how to count spokes of bicycles or teeth of family members. (Dental Math 
 
7 Here is an anecdote: A father of three children in Chandigarh explained the difficulties to me very clearly. He 
is an auto-rickshaw driver. During the day, the phone is with him and he needs it for a variety of reasons for 
work and otherwise. He comes home late at night. All day on his phone he has received pdf worksheets and 
other assignments for his three children. He is not able to understand (and often neither are his children) as to 
what has come from whom. Often the younger children are asleep when he gets back. He is also reluctant to 
hand over his phone to the children for too long.  
8 ASER 2021 (nationally representative household sample phone survey). See www.asercentre.org   
9 See SIT (Staying in Touch) Activity Round 1 report and Round 2 report from May-June 2020.  
5 
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wFa8hbS4VB8 or Counting with household objects). Similarly, 
math games are easy to communicate in the form of a pdf file, but much more creativity is required 
to make a SMS to be as engaging as possible.10  
 
Here are two examples of SMS that illustrate how several steps can be embedded within an SMS 
text message.  
 
  
 
Making content contextually relevant to engage families of children   
Since sending activity messages was a new activity, Pratham team members called families once a 
week or once a fortnight to understand how the family and how the children were responding to the 
inputs they were being sent. There is more discussion on two-way communication in the next 
section, however for now it is sufficient to say that feedback and response from families was 
invaluable for understanding which kinds of tasks or activities garnered greater participation from 
family members than others.   
 
Here are some examples for primary school age children: 
 
For example: consider the following task sent on an SMS message:   
“Draw a triangle with three equal sides.  
Name a triangle such as this?  
Draw a triangle which has two equal sides.  
What is the name of a triangle like this?” 
By and large, parents felt this was a “school-like” task and left children to do it on their own.  
 
In contrast, look at the following task: 
“How much water was used in your household yesterday.  
Can you estimate – how many buckets?  
How much for cooking, cleaning, washing, bathing, etc”   
 
10 See the internal studies on SIT (Staying in Touch) Round 1 and Round 2 reports.  
6 
 
This one led to many calls from family members and parents with questions and clarifications. 
Comments like, “Yesterday was not a good day for water supply so can we provide details for 
today?”, “Why should the estimate be in buckets and not in drums or tanks?” and so on.  
 
For parents and family members, “reaching at the right level” was the clue for their continued 
engagement. If activities were sent that were too school-like, family members passed them on to 
their children to do on their own. If activities were connected to real life then there was greater 
involvement of those in the household. In designing content for remote activities, it is worth 
remembering that the interest and motivation of family members will drive their interactions with 
children. Hence their responses are as important as those of children. “Real life” based learning had 
wide appeal for all. For younger children, the entire set of engagement activities is designed for 
parents or family members to do with their children.11 
 
“Why” something is worth learning, “who” can help and in “what way” can learning happen 
effectively are all matters as important as “what” to learn and “at what” level. The pandemic forced 
us to go behind the “what” and explore many interconnected aspects of motivation, interest and 
choice. Content and activities act as “triggers” rather than the end in itself.  The central role of 
“mediators” (mothers, parents, family members) of learning, their own interests and motivation are 
issues that we had never paid close attention to. In re-working our approach to children’s learning, 
these are important lessons from the pandemic experience that will have to be factored into future 
plans.     
 
 
C. Leveraging social structures for children’s learning: Engaging families and through them their 
children   
 
 
In much of the current discussions on the role of educational technology in children’s education, the 
focus is on the nature and type of  digital content, access to devices and to connectivity. In 
Pratham’s remote work during COVID, we have found that social structures (existing ones like 
friendships in the community or new ones like children’s groups and mothers’ groups) can play a big 
part in deepening engagement. Group activities and individual contact are both important in terms 
of keeping continuous participation at a high level and so is continuous two-way communication. As 
Pratham’s work moved during the pandemic from direct interactions with children to facilitating 
engagement through family members, it became clear that strengthening social structures around 
children is an effective investment for the present but also for the future.  
 
Two-way communication emerged as an essential ingredient for improving content and delivery in 
remote learning contexts; ongoing interactions and continuing conversations help in keeping 
children’s engagement and family participation high. Genuine feedback and in depth follow-up are 
constantly needed for tailoring and adjusting activities to fit the needs and interests of children and 
their families.   
 
Dealing with a known person gets more engagement than receiving bulk messages:  
 
11 Learnings from what happens with messages within the household were used very effectively in designing 
and delivering a 6-week health awareness and prevention campaign at the height of the devastating second 
wave of the pandemic – Karona Apni Suraksha (KAS). In this campaign, thematic messages went out every 
week (daily or on alternate days) to heighten awareness about what to do with COVID. Details of this campaign 
have been published in Delhi Government’s DCPCR journal 
(https://www.prathamyouthnet.org/prathamorg/Children_First.pdf). Also see Final KAS Presentation August 
2021.  
7 
 
Early in the initial lockdown period decisions had to be taken on how phone messages would go out. 
While WhatsApp technology enables distribution to groups to happen easily and two-way channels 
of communication are built in, that is not the case with SMS. Thus, it was felt that given the 
limitations of content delivery in text form and the weaker economic background of these 
households, SMS families would need more actual handholding and discussions. Instead of using 
bulk messaging, it was decided that each Pratham team member would send out SMS messages to 
communities where they were known before COVID struck. It would be the same person who would 
call once a week or once a fortnight to understand the current status of the family and feedback on 
the activities being sent. The ongoing interaction also encouraged children to send back their 
responses either in the form of video, audio, photographs, or text to the same known person.  For 
example, even if the child did not have a smartphone at home, it was not uncommon for children to 
be sending their responses to the activity prompts via neighbours’ or friends’ phones. Whether 
children or parents, motivation to share and to respond to content that was being sent was 
important in terms of maintaining high engagement over a period of time.   
 
Improving uptake and absorption of messages requires a two-way communication process   
Clear evidence of how human interaction leads to better traction was visible in the six-week large 
scale phone message COVID awareness campaign that was carried out by Pratham in May-June 
2021.12   
Uptake of phone messages - SMS and WhatsApp were similar, with nearly 2/3rd of the recipients 
reading these messages (this also means that a third of all messages received are not read). In a 
tracking study conducted as part of this campaign, a set of contacts were spoken to only once during 
the week (spot check contacts), while the rest were spoken to every day of the week. The data 
shows that ongoing communication on a daily basis made a difference,  especially in the interaction 
with messages, and sharing of information with other family members. For families with basic 
phones, those who  were contacted regularly shared COVID-related information and messages with 
other family members much more (10-40 percentage points higher) than those called only once a 
week.  
 
As technology makes it increasingly easier to widen access, and do it with lower cost and lower 
intensity, there is a tendency to prioritize reach over interaction and eventual message absorption 
and use. While human interaction is effective, this may limit our ability to scale or control costs. 
Balancing reach with interaction, ensuring that appropriate feedback is being received is important. 
Such balance may require constant experimenting with how much interaction is required for 
improving delivery and outcomes.  
 
Determining who in the household helps children with learning activities received through the 
phone:  
If there is one smart phone in the family, it is usually in the hands of the adult male (father or 
brother). A few “deep dives” with a small number of families was done in May-June 2020 to 
understand who receives the message and who does the activity with children in the family.13 Based 
on these studies, it seems that more fathers receive messages but more mothers are engaged in 
helping children. These patterns of engagement and participation vary by the child’s grade. While 
the focus of the “deep dive” was in tracking parental engagement, we did not sufficiently explore 
how siblings help each other in studying. In future studies, this fact needs to be investigated further.  
 
Understanding the implications of who helps whom within families is important for planning future 
action. Clearly more work is needed to involve fathers in engagement activities with children.  
 
12 See Pratham report 2_KAS (MME 2020-21).  
13 See Staying in touch reports Round 1 and Round 2 (MME 2020-21). 
8 
 
Perhaps more explicit “role modelling” will be needed.14 Design of content and activities with a view 
to bringing in fathers may also be needed. At the same time, increasing mothers’ access to digital 
content/devices may also help in strengthening what they can do with children.  
 
An interesting point about parent perceptions has emerged in a tracking study done with early 
graders in Satna, Madhya Pradesh. In this program, a baseline was done with children and their 
families in late 2019. A year later, when movement was possible, Pratham team members visited 
children’s homes, chatted with parents and also did one-on-one reading and math tasks with 
children. Parents were asked if they thought “phone messages had made a difference to their child’s 
learning”. Analysis of responses from over 1200 families suggests a strong correlation between 
parent’s positive perception and children’s learning gains. Parents who believed that messages 
helped also had children who had improved. While it is difficult to disentangle causation from 
correlation, it is probably true that parental beliefs can strengthen their effort to access learning 
opportunities for their children.15   
 
In the last year, Pratham’s efforts with young mothers has intensified. In all rural and urban 
communities where we have a direct presence, mothers’ groups have been formed in the mohalla or 
neighbourhood. These mothers get activity messages on their phones directly (daily or every other 
day) and the group meets periodically to discuss what they have been doing with their children. An 
in-house study tracking pre-school age indicated that young children learn more if there is 
engagement from family members.16  Another “deep dive” with mothers’ groups in Banaskantha 
district in Gujarat shows that understanding of foundational learning and importance of early 
childhood education is higher among mothers who had their own phones and had some years of 
schooling, but some of these advantages are evened out when mothers without cell phones or 
without much education are part of mothers’ groups.17 
 
 
Hamlet or Mohalla learning camps with youth volunteers  
 
During the first few months of the pandemic Pratham team members listed potential volunteers 
who were willing to help with children in their neighbourhood. More than 17,000 young volunteers 
ran mini-learning camps in hamlets in 2020 and ~25,000 volunteers conducted 
neighbourhood/mohalla learning camps during the two-month catch-up campaign in the August-
October 2021 period just before schools began to open in much of India. These young volunteers 
continue to be an important pillar in the social structure that support engagement with and learning 
of children. 
 
HOW HAVE THE DIFFERENT INPUTS IMPACTED CHILDREN’S LEARNING IN PRATHAM PROGRAMS?  
 
Without a proper control or comparison group, it is not possible to understand what would have 
happened if there had been no efforts from Pratham. It was also not possible to collect data on what 
inputs children were receiving from school sources, from their own sources and how consistently 
these types of learning opportunities were available. There were a few cases during the lockdown 
 
14 An interesting example emerged, unintentionally, from one of the early years videos. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Fj4ztn50eg. The video clip from Pratham showed a young father and his 
son playing a pattern game with household utensils. In response to the video, many families sent back video 
similar clips in which young fathers were seen doing that activity in their own homes.   
15 Pratham Pandemic Report 3 EY Satna 2020 
16 Pratham Pandemic Report 2 ECE SBA 2020-21. Slide no. 17 
17 Pratham Pandemic Report 2 and Report 3  
9 
 
where it was possible to track whether the “staying in touch” efforts were reaping results by using 
some of the internal variations within the program data:  
 
• 
Early Years program in Satna, Madhya Pradesh: This is a community-based intervention for 
improving basic reading and math for children in Grades 1 to 3 that had started in October 
2019. However, the pandemic struck less than six months after the program began.  
Comparing basic learning levels in December 2020 with that in 2019, we see that overall the 
percentage of children who can at least read words increased from 26% to 50%. Over half of 
all children improved their reading. While it is difficult to exactly attribute what led to the 
increase (or the lack of decline), evidence suggests that for children who received phone 
messages learning gains were higher than those who did not receive messages.18  
 
• 
Pratham direct programs: In February 2021, Pratham teams conducted what was called the 
“Reach and Learning Exercise”. At the time, the incidence of COVID seemed to be abating 
and it was important to carry out structured visits to a sample of Pratham communities to 
understand how children had fared in the past year in terms of their schooling status and 
learning levels. A sample of 270 villages and communities were visited across the country. 
These were locations where Pratham had been running programs in the pre-COVID time. 
Overall 37,000 children were surveyed in this exercise. For approximately 20,000 children 
data was collected about whether they had received any inputs from Pratham since 
lockdown began in March 2020. Inputs included phone messages, participation in any 
Pratham-facilitated children’s group activities including classes. For younger children it 
included involvement of their mothers in mothers’ group activities.19 Data suggests that 
children who received more inputs (messages, neighbourhood activities) gained slightly 
more in terms of basic learning than those who received fewer inputs. Also, children who 
were part of Pratham’s volunteer classes in the community had overall better learning levels 
than children who did not participate.  
 
 
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS:  
 
For Pratham, like for many other organizations, the pandemic period has been a very fertile one – 
new challenges, new experiments, new capacities and new learnings. All across the organization, 
Pratham teams learned to use digital devices and content in a way that enabled them to reach 
children, youth and families. We learned how to function in a flexible way and how to change gears 
as per the lockdown restrictions and COVID situation in the communities. The last two years have 
also highlighted how different types of people (mothers, parents, youth) can participate and 
contribute to their children’s learning. They have taught us how existing social structures can be 
leveraged for deeper engagement and continued connections for learning. Many of the lessons 
learned (successes and failures) will be adapted for longer run use and for strengthening our efforts 
to enable every child to learn.  
 
  
 
 
 
18 Pratham Pandemic Report 3 EY Satna. In November 2019, of the children who did not receive phone 
messages later, 14% could read words or more. A year later, the proportion of these children who could read 
words went up to 30%. Among children who later received messages, 28% were able to read words or more in 
2019 and this level went up to 54% a year later. (In terms of percentage point improvement, the “message 
children” gained 10 percentage points more than the “no-message children”.) See slide no. 14 and 22.    
19 Pratham Pandemic Report 4: Reach & Learning Exercise Feb 2021. See slide no. 28-29-30.  
10 
 
ENDNOTES:  Some other interventions worth highlighting  
 
(1) QUIZ: 
 
An initiative that was first tried in Bihar in late 2020 and then taken to scale during the KAS- Karona 
Apni Suraksha campaign during May-July 2021 was the web-link based ‘Quiz’ exercise. A simple, 
relevant, and engaging multi-choice quiz linked to the content shared via SMS & WhatsApp was an 
effective way of engaging with our key stakeholders – children, parents, volunteers, and youth. While 
the quiz could be taken by anyone who had a smartphone, we developed a feature where a maximum 
of 10 participants could be linked to one device/ phone number. This enabled us to reach those 
children and parents who did not have smartphones as well. State teams shared this link with all their 
contacts for a specific time duration and encouraged them to share it further in their community. 
Through a real-time dashboard, teams could track participation in the quiz at a district & block level. 
This information created healthy competition within and among states and districts across Pratham.  
 
In the second quiz of Karona Apni Suraksha (KAS) – the corona awareness campaign in May-June 2021 
- the quiz was taken by almost 1 million participants over a 7-day period. A prescheduled ‘recall-based’ 
activity helped promote engagement, participation, and excitement. Having questions for both 
children as well as adults increased participation. Since the KAS campaign, the web-linked Quiz 
platform (which has been developed completely in-house by the MME team) has been used in the 
Math Mohalla Learning Camps and now is regularly being used in Bihar’s government partnership 
programs which are focused on government appointed education volunteers and mothers in Self-help 
Groups. 
 
 
(2) BROADCAST MEDIA: 
 
Pratham teams in different states also collaborated with State Governments to share educational 
content via different broadcast media such as TV and Radio. Two of the most prominent programs 
were the Shale-baherchi-Shala (school out of school) radio program in Maharashtra and the Mera 
Doordarshan, Mera Vidyalaya campaign on DD Bihar in Bihar. The TV program was designed to focus 
on the foundation skills of reading (in Hindi) and basic math. Designed to be for one hour, Pratham 
produced 3-4 capsules of concept pieces per episode of 6-7 minutes each, interspersed with fun 
learning activities for the students to do at home. Having anchors, breaks, characters, and fun activities 
in between ensured that the children engaged with the content like a TV program as opposed to an 
instructional video. The Radio program used a transmedia approach by combining the use of 
SMS/WhatsApp and radio broadcast. Using multiple mechanisms for reaching children made the 
experience of engagement and learning experience hybrid and unique. Daily engagement activities 
for children were sent through WhatsApp/SMS to each parent. Designed for learners of pre-primary 
and primary age groups, the messages were written in Marathi and were focused on age-appropriate 
learning activities. Activities were designed to be simple and easy for parents especially mothers to do 
with their children. 
 
For both modes, as Pratham learnt from message sharing, establishing a two-way communication was 
important to ensure regular engagement and hence Pratham members and government teachers 
would regularly conduct follow-up/ feedback calls to discuss content previously shown on TV or heard 
on the radio program. 
 
In a sample survey (2,100 households) conducted by the Bihar team, it was found that 38% of the 
households said that they watched the TV program every day and a similar percentage (40%) watched 
it sometimes in the week. 21% did not watch the TV program, however 88% of the households who 
11 
 
didn’t watch the TV program gave lack of access to a device as the primary reason. Families with Std 
1-2 and Std 3-5 children reported that siblings are the ‘people at home’ who help the child solve the 
activities done in the TV program. Mothers tend to help more than Fathers for both groups. 2/3rd of 
households with Std 1-2 children reported that the child required help to the solve activities on the 
TV program, while little more than half (56%) of Std 3-5 children required help from family members.   
 
